Self Balancing Motorbike using
Funnel Controller
Niek Fikkers - S3278204
Swathi Krishnanunni - S5931266
Ammar Akhlaq Ahmed - S6113613
1Abstract
This report investigates the application of funnel control for real-time stabilization of a self-balancing motorcycle
equipped with a flywheel. The system’s objective is to regulate the roll (tilt) angle of the motorcycle to
asymptoticallytrackazero reference, corresponding totheuprightequilibrium position. Amodel-free, nonlinear
funnel controller is employed to guarantee that the tracking error remains strictly within a predefined, time-
varying performance (the funnel), despite uncertainties in system dynamics and external disturbances. The
proposed controller adapts without requiring explicit knowledge of the motorcycle’s full dynamics, relying only
on real-time measurements of the tilt angle. By using a feedback mechanism, where control effort rises as the
error gets closer to the funnel boundary, the control mechanism guarantees the performance requirements. In
this report we have formulated the theory required for the experimental knowledge, modeling of the system
and experimental validation which proves the robustness and effectiveness of the funnel control Mechanism in
making bounded-error convergence and maintaining stability.
1Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 System Overview 4
3 Equations of motion 5
4 Filter 7
5 PD(P) Controller 9
6 Funnel Controller 12
6.1 Degree 2 Funnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
6.2 Tuning the Funnel boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6.3 Simulink application of the Funnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.4 Problems faced with the funnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
7 Conclusion 17
8 Future Scope 17
9 Appendix 19
9.1 Moments of inertia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
9.2 DC motor torque vs rotational speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
9.3 Constants used in PD(P) controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
9.4 Controller and Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
9.5 Internal structure of Funnel controller and PID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
21 Introduction
When a two-wheeled vehicle is subjected to external forces, maintaining balance becomes a difficult control issue
due to perturbations and nonlinear behavior. This project concentrates on the creation and implementation of
a funnel Controller. A flywheel is used by the controller to maintain the stability of a self-balancing motorbike.
The tilt angle is controlled by the motorcycle when it is stationary or moving slowly, allowing it to remain
upright, through the torque produced by a rotating flywheel.
The funnel controller is different from conventional control strategies, which does not need the model of the
system. An adaptive control approach that doesn’t use a model and ensures that the tracking error falls within a
given time-varying range. The boundary is referred to as the funnel. Because of this, it is especially appropriate
for uncertain systems like where specific characteristics of our motorbike, such as moment of inertia, damping,
or disruptions, may be hard to ascertain either measure or forecast precisely.
A traditional Proportional Derivative (PD) controller is used in addition to the funnel controller to ensure the
motorcycle’s stability. The PD controller is in charge of producing corrective inputs to the DC motor based on
the measured tilt angle and its rate of change. The system maintains a steady torque by constantly monitoring
the tilt angle and making adjustments as needed. The PD controller attempts to minimize both steady-state
and transient errors by modifying the control input in accordance with the present error. Its simplicity, ease of
implementation, and real-time response make it a easy option for early testing thus making the PD controller
a benchmark for comparison.
The tilt angle (roll angle) of the motorcycle is the output of interest in this application, and the reference signal
is representing the ideal vertical posture as zero. The tilt angle is maintained within the specified range by the
funnel controller. A shrinking boundary with time that permits early transients but enforces high long-term
performance. The theoretical understanding of the funnel control, a little bit of PID, modelling of self-balancing
bike and the experimental findings are all covered in this report.
32 System Overview
Figure 1: The bike that was used in this report to generate the data.
The primary objective is to regulate the motorcycle’s tilt angle using a flywheel torque and maintain an upright
posture under slight disturbances.The system consists of the following key components:
The flywheel acts as the balance correction actuator, makes up the flywheel mechanism. Using this torque, the
system is effectively stabilised.
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) detects the motorbike’s real-time tilt angle and its angular velocity.
The motor communicates with the flywheel motor to precisely regulate its rotational speed and torque output.
Servo Motor (Steering) improves the directional stability of the front wheel which is coupled to a servo motor.
43 Equations of motion
A PID or Funnel controller does not require the system dynamics to achieve its goal. However, the equations
of motion will provide us with an insight into the dynamics of the system. Most importantly, it will provide us
with the relative degree of the system. Namely, the Funnel controller implemented in Section 6 is for systems
of relative degree 2.
To derive the equations of motion the bike is considered to be a pendulum with an attached flywheel. Consider
Figure 2 in which the back of the bike can be seen. The variables θandωare defined, where the arrows for both
denote the positive direction. The capital letters A,B,C and D denote in respective order, the axis of rotation
for the pendulum, center of mass of the pendulum, center of mass and axis of rotation of the flywheel and lastly
the end of the pendulum. The pendulum and the flywheel are considered to have a uniform and equal density.
In practice the point at which the bike is in balance is never exactly at θ= 0rad, but slightly deviated from
this point. This amount is referred to as the bias in this report.
Figure 2: The back view of the bike with the definitions of the variables θandω. The capital letters A,B,C
and D denote in respective order, the axis of rotation for the combined system, center of mass of the combined
system, center of mass and axis of rotation of the flywheel and lastly the end of the pendulum. (This image has
been corrected and the original comes from [3].)
Let’s start with the equation describing the movement of the pendulum (rod). For this we usePτ=I¨θ,
τr+τf+τm= (IA
r+IA
f)¨θ,
where τris the torque coming from gravity acting on the pendulum (rod),
τfis the torque comes from gravity acting on the flywheel,
τmis the torque generated by the DC motor,
IA
ris the moment of inertia of the pendulum (rod) when rotating around point A and
IA
fis the moment of inertia of the flywheel when rotating around point A. The moments of inertia can be found
in Appendix 9.1.
5Secondly, we have the equation describing the movement of the flywheel.
τm=IC
f( ˙ω+¨θ),
where IC
fis the moment of inertia of the flywheel when rotating around point C.
We can write these equations into the following state space model
˙x(t) =
˙θ
¨θ
˙ω
=
˙θ
τr+τf+u(t)
IAr+IA
f
u(t)
IC
f−¨θ
(1)
y(t) =θ(t), (2)
with u(t) =τm. The equations with all the terms explicitly determined can be found in Appendix 9.1. Observe
that taking 2time derivatives of the output y(t)gives us an expression that contains the input u(t). This is
relevant for the funnel controller discussed in Section 8, as we have a system of relative degree 2.
64 Filter
It is important to have good measurements coming from the IMU, as these will be used in the controller. In
Figure 3, a graph of the measured ˙θcan be seen along with the filtered ˙θ. This was done in an attempt to make
the bike more stable and avoid spike in the inputs send to the DC motor. The time span in the graph is a rather
short 1s but this is because it takes less than approximately 0.5s to go from θ= 0rad to θ= 0.24rad≈14o.
At this (arbitrarily chosen) angle the bike is considered fallen over in a safety mechanism. This angle is larger
than the angle (exact angle is unknown) from which the bike can put itself back to θ= 0.
However, no change in behaviour was noticed, but also no rigorous tests were done besides simply observing the
bike balancing with and without the filter. This filter is used for all the tests described in this report.
Figure 3: Filtering of ˙θ, using a moving average of the last 3values. During this period the bike was in balance
using the PDP controller (Section 5) and had a flywheel speed of ω≈21rad/s.
In Figure 4 an extreme case is shown where the flywheel is spinning very fast (relatively speaking). This causes
more and larger vibrations than observed in Figure 3, also notice that the scale of the y axis has been changed.
7Figure 4: Filtering of ˙θ, using a moving average of the last 3values. During this period the bike was notin
balance and was kept physically in place. It had an extreme flywheel speed of ω≈ −425rad/s. Also notice
that magnitude of the y axis has tripled with respect to Figure 3.
85 PD(P) Controller
Let’s start with a feedback controller (PD Controller), where we considered the output to be the angular position
y(t) =θ(t), just like discussed in Section 3. The generic input equation of a PID controller is
u(t) =Kp(y(t)−yref(t)) +KiZt
0(y(τ)−yref(τ))dτ+Kdd
dt(y(t)−yref(t)).
The reference output value is taken to be yref(t) = 0and no integral term is used in the control input resulting
in
u(t) =Kpθ(t) +Kd˙θ(t). (3)
However, in practice this input for the fly wheel motor only keeps the bike upright for a couple of seconds. In
Figure 5 the 3state space variables ( θ,˙θandω) can be seen over time. Here the bike is briefly in balance but
meanwhile the flywheel’s angular velocity increases linearly. This is because when the measured angle θ= 0
the bike is not necessarily exactly in balance, i.e. there is a bias. Thus requiring a constant acceleration of the
fly wheel to keep the bike in balance. This is problematic as the flywheel has a maximum velocity at which
point the DC motor can no longer generate a torque in the direction of the velocity.[3] (DC motors have the
characteristic that their torque decreases linearly as the angular velocity increases, see Figure 13 in Appendix
9.2.)
Figure 5: A briefly balancing bike using the PD controller (3), where the angular velocity grows linearly until
the generated amount of torque becomes too small to keep it in balance and it falls. The bike has been moved
(by hand) close to the equilibrium point to start the balancing.
9The unbounded angular velocity ωof the flywheel can be mitigated by introducing ωinto the controller function
(making it a PDP controller).[3]
u(t) =Kpθ(t) +Kd˙θ(t) +Kωω(t) (4)
In Figure 6 the states of the system can be seen along with the "bounded" ωand observe that the system
remains in balance. For the sake of making an easy comparison, the same y axis has been used in Figure 5 and
6.
Figure 6: A balancing bike using the PDP controller (4), where the angular velocity becomes almost constant
with respect to Figure 5. Also note that this remains in balance after it has been moved (by hand) close to the
equilibrium point.
In Figure 7 the individual components of u(t), namely Kpθ(t),Kd˙θ(t)andKωω(t)are plotted over time to show
each components’ contribution in keeping the bike in balance. Observe that Kωω(t)acts as a dynamic bias to
counteract the term Kpθ(t). The data shown comes from the same test that generated Figure 6.
10Figure 7: The individual components of u(t), namely Kpθ(t),Kd˙θ(t)andKωω(t)plotted over time. The data
shown comes from the same test that generated Figure 6 and has the same colour legend.
The parameters used in the test that generated the graphs shown in this section can be found in Appendix 9.3.
116 Funnel Controller
The main goal was to apply the funnel to the self balancing bike, we will be attaching a Simulink file as well
and a tutorial on how we constructed the funnel in Simulink and the foresight behind it, the tutorial can be
removed or kept by the professor to his liking.
We will first look into the used equations used for the relative degree 2 funnel.
6.1 Degree 2 Funnel
In principle the Funnel controller works similar to the PID but the gains are adaptively bounded. The control
objective of the Funnel controller is to track the error:
e=y−yref (5)
which in our case is the θ.
and its derivative:
˙e= ˙y−˙yref (6)
which is ˙θ.
The terms yref&˙yrefare set to zero which means that we want our self balancing bike to be upright with
minimal movement of the flywheel.
The control is achieved by the funnel controller
u(t) =−K0(t)2e(t)−k1(t) ˙e(t). (7)
Now we look at the respective funnel boundaries for e & ˙e,
k0=φ(t)
1−φ(t)|e(t)|
and
k1=φ(t)
1−φ(t)|˙e(t)|.
These are the two high upper gain boundaries for e & ˙e. Displaying one for simplicity below.
Figure 8: Upper boundary for theta for continuity the second graph also has the upper boundary.
12Figure 9: This is the gain for K0with respect to the values of theta and its funnel boundary.
We shall also look at the respective high gain with relation to the upper boundary again using the parameters
ofθand its respective adaptive gain. One thing to note is that as θarrives in close proximity to the boundary
it can be seen in Figure 9 that the gain has now jumped to very large negative numbers.[1] [4]
What this means is that when these values approach the boundary the corresponding gain rises inversely to
counteract the system to remain in the boundary giving the flywheel an ever increasing input as seen in Figure
10.
13Figure 10: The Funnel output in orange with theta in green and funnel upper boundary purple this graph.
The Figure illustrates that as θapproaches the boundary there must be a maximal input the system can adhere
to, hence there must be a input saturation applied.
6.2 Tuning the Funnel boundaries
The minimum value for the Funnel boundaries that we measured were +/−0.16as seen in Figure 10 where the
purple line dictates the upper boundary. Though initially it may seem like the boundary is not near the θthe
system is perturbing from zero we see that the funnel output is quite large when compared to both the other
values. We first started off with keeping the boundary as large as possible 0.4- then transitioned to lower the
boundaries up until 0.16. at a lower boundary like 0.1the system then becomes too sensitive to perturbations
and can be see in Figure 11. When Figure 11 is compared to 10 it is easily be observed that changing the funnel
boundary from 0.16to0.1the funnel will now be unstable. One thing to note is that the scale is larger in Figure
11 when compared to 10.
14Figure 11: Funnel comparison with much lower boundary closer to theta
6.3 Simulink application of the Funnel
The application to Simulink in hindsight was fairly simple we will be providing the exact techniques in the
appendix. The structure of the funnel will be discussed and the exact design will be placed in the appendix.
We wanted to combine both funnel and PDP control together using a parallel structure, and the result we
obtained was an unstable system where the funnel controller and PDP control were working in parallel to
balance the system. It can be seen that very small perturbations can cause the system to destabilize after many
seconds of unstable balancing.
Figure 12: Funnel in orange and PID in blue.
156.4 Problems faced with the funnel
The issues posed with the funnel were:
•The proposed funnel must be of relative degrees higher than 2 supposedly 4. Where we consider the
dynamics of the motor, i.e. from the electrical signal to inertia.
•Bike motor limitations with funnel: The adaptive gain are insufficient for output so the limitations lie
within the ability of the motor to balance for high gains.
167 Conclusion
This implementation of the funnel controller for the self-balancing motorcycle demonstrated the system’s abil-
ity to maintain upright under small disturbances for a small time frame then it would destabilize. Using the
controller the tilt angle of the bike was regulated through the torque on the flywheel making the motorcycle
balance. Though the theory says the funnel control works better than the classical controller and the ability to
tolerate larger disturbances are better for the funnel, we were not able to establish this using the experimental
results. Practical limitations such as noise, uncertainty in the relative degree may have contributed to the gap
between this theoretical and observed performance. Nevertheless, the funnel controller provided a stable and
adaptive response without requiring a model of the system, making its potential for control applications in
nonlinear systems.
8 Future Scope
•Implementing a higher relative degree due to motor dynamics will be necessary in order for the funnel to
bound the output with the existing funnels.
•Better understanding of input saturation and understanding of the system dynamics will be a must in
order to continue applying the funnel for future projects.
•For the application of model Reference control it can be implemented for relatively better control of the
bike. This reference can also be applied to the funnel controller so as opposed to using a constant block
0 for both e and ˙e.
•Instead of PDP, using a PID the Iterm will remove the need to change the bias for every bike and surface.
If this responds fast enough to changes in the bias it can be used to keep the bike in balance when taking
turns at speeds where the centrifugal force becomes significant.
17References
[1] J. Hu, S. Trenn, X. Zhu. A novel two stages funnel controller limiting the error derivative. Systems & Control
Letters, vol. 179, pp. 105601, 2023.
[2] C.M. Hackl. Non-Identifier Based Adaptive Control in Mechatronics–Theory and Application . Lecture Notes
in Control and Information Sciences, vol. 466, Springer-Verlag, Cham, Switzerland, 2017. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-55036-7 .
[3] ArduinoEducation.ArduinoEngineeringKitRev2.RetrievedApril16, 2025. https://edu-content-preview.
arduino.cc/content-preview/university/project/CONTENTPREVIEW+AEKR2
[4] Hackl, C.M., Hopfe, N., Ilchmann, A., Mueller, M., & Trenn, S. Funnel control for systems with relative
degree two . SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 965–995, 2013.
189 Appendix
9.1 Moments of inertia
For both the moments of inertia the parallel axis theorem is used. The moment of inertia of the pendulum
(rod), a tall cylinder, around point A is
IA
r=IB
r+mrl2
AB=1
12mr(3r2+l2
AD) +mrl2
AB,
where mris the mass of the pendulum,
ris the radius of the pendulum and
lABis the distance between points A and B.
The moment of inertia of the flywheel around point A is
IA
f=IC
f+mfl2
AC=1
2mfR2+mfl2
AC,
where mfis the mass of the flywheel,
Ris the radius of the flywheel and
lACis the distance between points A and C.
Substituting these moments of inertia into (1) we obtain
˙x(t) =
˙θ
¨θ
˙ω
=
˙θ
gsin(θ)(mrlAB+mflAC)+u(t)
mf(0.5R2+l2
AC)+1
12mr(3r2+l2
AD)+mrl2
ABu(t)
IC
f−¨θ

9.2 DC motor torque vs rotational speed
The torque that a DC motor can generate decreases as the rotational speed increases, see Figure 13.
Rotational speedTorque
Figure 13: Torque vs rotational speed in a DC motor.
9.3 Constants used in PD(P) controller
In Table 1, the constants that have been used to generate the data can be seen.
19Parameter Value
θbias -0.015
Kp 65
Kd 5
Kω 0.015
Table 1: The constants that are used in the test with the filter and PD(P) controller.
9.4 Controller and Plant
We start with our design of the controller and system. A bus is used to connect the digital controller and the
motorcycle.
Figure 14: Controller and Motorcycle structure.
This is the structure of the Controller an Motorcycle which shows inputs from the motorcycle flow into the
digital controller and the controller then sends an output to the motors on the motorcycle.
Figure 15: Smaller components connection to bus as input to the controller.
On the left side of the image we can see that the input of the motorcycle sends the information of 5 variables
top to bottom: angular rate ˙θEuler which is θand status which tells us whether the IMU is calibrated or not.
The 4th block is the encoder, which counts the number of rotations of the flywheel which is needed, the 5th is
Battery read tells us how much voltage the battery is able to send to the system. On the right-hand side we have
2 motors on the top motor M3 is the flywheel and it is connected to the digital controller it has a saturation of
255 the maximum number the system can handle and then it is connected via saturation to prevent any circuit
20malfunction due to high voltage. Lastly we have the M2 motor which is designed to move the bike back and
forth.
Figure 16: This Figure is the overall design of the logic board sensor data connection and controller.
This Figure shows how our digital controller is connected to a switch via a chart on the bottom and it defines
4 stats:
•Battery OK
•IMU Calibration
•Upright
When all the values are at a certain threshold we will see that all the lights turn green which switches the output
from 0 to the output of the controller.
219.5 Internal structure of Funnel controller and PID
Figure 17: This Figure displays our over all structure of the controllers that we have implemented on the Self
balancing bike.
The internal structure from top to bottom has the following:
•Relative Degree 1 funnel
•Relative Degree 2 funnel
•PDP controller
The following is a list of all the blocks used be aware that this is the list for the version 2024b it may be sub-
jected to change in the preceding versions.The design for the Simulink model for PID controller can be found
on [3],this may also be subjected to change for the self balancing motorcycle please look accordingly
•Clock Block
•Sum Block
•Gain Block
•Bus Selector
•Matlab Function Block
•Chart Block for Logic
•Constant blocks to be connected to various other blocks for Matlab functions and Summation blocks.
•Imu sensor BNO055, Encoder 1 and battery reader motor M1 M2 DC Motor
22